---
layout:             post
title:              "AI Will Change the World.<br>Who Will Change AI?<br>We Will"
date:               2020-08-16 9:00:00
author:             Sophia Stiles
img:                assets/BAIR_Logo.png
excerpt_separator:  <!--more-->
visible:            True
show_comments:      False
---

<meta name="twitter:title" content="AI Will Change the World. Who Will Change AI? We Will">
<meta name="twitter:card" content="summary_image">
<meta name="twitter:image" content="https://bair.berkeley.edu/blog/assets/BAIR_Logo.png">

*Editor’s Note: The following blog is a special guest post by a recent graduate
of Berkeley BAIR’s AI4ALL summer program for high school students.*

AI4ALL is a nonprofit dedicated to increasing diversity and inclusion in AI
education, research, development, and policy.

[The idea for AI4ALL][1] began in early 2015 with Dr. Olga Russakovsky, a Stanford
University Ph.D. student, AI researcher Prof. Fei-Fei Li, and Dr. Rick
Sommer–Executive Director of Stanford Pre-Collegiate Studies. They founded
SAILORS as a summer outreach program for high school girls to learn about
human-centered AI, which later became AI4ALL. In 2016, Dr. Anca Dragan started
the Berkeley/BAIR AI4ALL camp, geared towards high school students from
underserved communities.

<!--more-->

## Before I Started the Program

When I discovered AI4ALL during the spring semester, I was curious to learn
more. I knew that AI had the potential to change everything and that it was
something I’d love to be a part of.  To prepare for the program, I read up on
the [BAIR faculty][2] and checked out the [BAIR student][3] profiles. I watched
Stuart Russell’s TED talk “[3 principles for creating safer AI][4].” The people
were so all so highly accomplished. And their ideas seemed either super
technical, or at the other end of the spectrum, sounded more like topics from
the philosophy department than the EECS department. I realized I have no idea
what to expect but decided just to give it a try and get started.

## The First Day

After logging into my first day of AI4ALL on Zoom, I was pleasantly surprised
by the number of eager and welcoming faces. Among them were Tim Hurt, Eva Chao,
Rachel Walsh, Ben Frazier, and Maya Maliviya. They were all there to help us
feel comfortable and succeed!

We started off with a quick ice-breaker introduction activity. This
particularly resonated with me because it wasn’t like the typical type you’d
have on the first day of school. Instead, we were divided into virtual breakout
rooms and asked us to find as many similarities among our peers as possible.
The program was already off to a great start! Within just a few minutes, I
learned that five other people in the room have a sibling, have taken
chemistry, like pizza, and had a quarantine haircut just like me! It was a
great way to encourage collaboration and bonding.

Next, we were joined by BAIR lab professor Anca Dragan for a talk about AI. The
presentation was hard to forget because of her passion, her curiosity, and the
depth of her knowledge. Anca kickstarted the talk by explaining some examples
of AI in real life. This was already so useful because it immediately cleared
up the misconceptions about AI. In addition, it allowed everyone to have
common, shared learning and not feel excluded if they didn’t know as much about
AI before starting the program.

Another element of the Anca’s presentation that stood out was her description
of an AI game. The game is simple: a robot is positioned in a grid and gains
points for reaching gems and loses points for falling in fire pits. Anca walked
us through the AI “backstory” of the game. The robot’s goal is to maximize the
points earned. As the game’s allotted time decreases, the robot takes less
cautious paths (ex: avoiding fire pits) and places its primary focus on gaining
points. We learned that this idea of optimization is a core part of all AI
systems.

By the end of the day, we were immersed in a Python notebook while conversing
with peers in a Breakout Room. AI4ALL equipped us with Python notebooks through
[Google Collab][5] so we would all be on the same page when talking about code.
I really enjoyed this part of the program because it was open-ended and the
material was presented in such a clean and convenient fashion. As I read
through the content and completed the coding exercises, I couldn’t help but
also notice the amusing GIFs embedded here and there! What a memorable way to
begin learning AI!

## Midway Through the Program

Early on Day 3 of the 4 day AI4ALL program, I began to really understand the
significance of AI. Through the eye-opening presentation lectures and
discussions, I realized that AI really is everywhere! It’s in our [YouTube
recommendations][6], [Spotify algorithms][7], Google Maps, and robotic surgery
equipment. That range of applications is part of what makes AI so promising. AI
really can be for everyone, whether you’re a developer or a user - it’s not
limited to people with mad coding skills. Once I got acquainted with the basics
of the subject, I began to see how almost any idea can be reshaped with AI.

I also learned that AI is often different from the way it’s presented in the
media. Almost everyone is familiar with the idea of robots taking over jobs,
but that isn’t necessarily what will happen. AI still has a long way to go
before it will truly “take over the world,” as hypothesized. AI is a work in
progress. Like its creators, it has biases. It can unintentionally
discriminate. It has adversaries and struggles to find insights with incomplete
data. Still, AI has the power to change basic aspects of our world. This is why
it is so important to have people from as many backgrounds as possible involved
in AI. Introducing people from many different backgrounds into the field allows
for a better range of ideas and can help reduce the number of missed “red
flags” that might later have a big impact on the lives of real people.

## By the End of the Program...

The last two days of AI4ALL sped by in a blur. I couldn’t help but notice how
well the program was organized. There was a balanced combination of lectures,
discussion, and individual work time for coding and collaborating. I also loved
how the content at the end of the program reinforced the content from the
start. That aspect of the program’s structure made it so much easier to ask
questions, remember ideas, and apply to future activities.

I particularly saw this idea of reinforcement demonstrated in Professor
Kamalika Chaduri’s presentation about AI adversaries. She explained how AI
algorithms could be manipulated so that an image correctly identified with 50%
confidence as a panda would then identify the same image with 90% confidence as
a gibbon. On the previous day, Professor Jacob Steinhardt explained how images
that appeared similar to the human eye can be tweaked to disrupt AI’s
algorithm. In another example, Kamalika described how image pixels could be
stored as training data in the form of vectors. This idea built off of Tim
Hurt’s earlier point that training data is a result of an input being
translated into computer language (e.g. a vector x), and then mapped to a label
output (y).

After most of the lectures were done, we began working on our group projects.
We were divided into five groups, with each group under the instruction of a
Berkeley Ph.D. student. I chose to be in the “Overcooked” group, which was with
first-year EECS student Micah Carrol. Micah walked us through his own game,
called Overcooked. Simply put, Overcooked is all about getting the most number
of onion soups delivered while cooking in a cramped kitchen.

Once again, we used Collab Notebooks to learn and experiment with the game’s
code. Micah patiently took us through the basics of imitation learning,
reinforcement learning, decision trees, and graph fitting/displays. He was so
open to questions and never hesitated to help! The hours we spent together
breezed by, and soon enough I found myself crafting up a final presentation
recapping all that I learned. Time really passes when you’re enjoying and
learning.

## Final Thoughts

In less than a week, the AI4ALL program has shaped my view of AI and my
learning process. The lectures, advice panels, and project groups came together
to make an unforgettable experience. Beyond learning what AI is and how it
works, I now realize that everyone has the potential to explore AI. All you
have to do is start. And so, the next time you hear someone say “AI will change
the world, but who will change AI?”, you can say with confidence “we will!”

Thank you so much to everyone who made AI4ALL possible!

[1]:https://ai-4-all.org/about/our-story/#:~:text=AI4ALL%20is%20a%20US%2Dbased,Dr.
[2]:https://bair.berkeley.edu/faculty.html
[3]:https://bair.berkeley.edu/students.html
[4]:https://www.ted.com/talks/stuart_russell_3_principles_for_creating_safer_ai
[5]:https://colab.research.google.com/notebooks/intro.ipynb
[6]:https://research.google/pubs/pub45530/
[7]:https://engineering.atspotify.com/2020/01/16/for-your-ears-only-personalizing-spotify-home-with-machine-learning/
[8]:https://medium.com/swlh/ai-google-maps-79237f8946e3
[9]:https://bair.berkeley.edu/blog/2017/10/17/lfd-surgical-robots/
